# bloom.c3l - Universal Bloom Filters &amp; Extensions for the C3 Language

A [Bloom Filter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloom_filter) is a universal data structure which uses hashing and bitsets to provide space-efficient, constant-time insertion and lookup.

The key property of these filters is that set membership is evaluated as `definitely not in set` or `maybe in set`. For set lookups - e.g., some certificate's membership in a very long list of revoked fingerprints - getting a negative result can immediately and quickly stop any further operations without traversing the entire set.

Another unique property is that lookups/insertions remain constant-time regardless of how many elements are already in the set.


## Idiosyncrasies
- From a usability perspective, with most filter sizes, bloom filters are almost always workable in-memory. Therefore, they can be flushed to long-term storage if and whenever _the developer_ chooses, not by the library itself in order to preserve some kind of interim state information.
- Given an `n` (number of stored elements) of around 100 million, an assumption of about 10 bits allocated per expected `n` would result in a Bloom filter of only about `120 MiB` of data! Pretty great for input elements of _any given size_; when you consider even a `ulong` element type, this is a significant space-savings.
- You cannot remove elements from an ordinary bloom filter, as the bits set to zero for one element may be shared by other elements in the set.
- The hashing algorithm used by this library defaults to the C3 standard library's `a5hash` implementation, but that can be overridden by calling `bloom::set_hash_function`. The signature of the desired hash function _must_ match `fn ulong(char[] element, ulong hash_seed)` - AKA, the `BloomHashFn` type.


# Usage
The core `BloomFilter` structure provides the following API methods to use:
- `init` - create a new filter
- `copy` - spawn an in-memory copy of the filter and its meta-data
- `serialize` - marshal the filter and meta-data into a binary blob that can be saved to a file and reimported
- `deserialize` - create a filter structure in memory from a blob generated by `serialize`
<!-- - `export` -  -->
- `free` - deallocate a filter
- `insert` - add a new element to the filter
- `contains` - query whether the element likely exists in the set

Any supplemental bloom filter types - e.g., counting bloom filters - will have similar methods exposed.

### Making a new filter
Creation of a new filter expects foreknowledge of:
- a maximum elements count `n` as a `usz`
- a desired false-positive rate as a non-zero `double` value, 0 < `e` < 1

### Inserting elements
//

### Lookups
//

### Approximating the stored element count
//

### Saving filters or accessing raw filter data
//
